# Hydrophobicity Classifier of Polymer Insulators

Real-Time Classification of Polymer Insulator Defects using Convolutional Neural Networks and Deep Learning

Abstract:
Polymer insulators play a vital role in maintaining our power grid integrity, but their hydrophobicity (resistance to water damage) deteriorates over time, impacting their performance. The conventional process of classifying the hydrophobicity level based on IEEE standards (a scale of 1 to 6) usually relies on the expert analysis of utility engineers, which is slow and not always readily available. To address this, we are introducing a cost-effective and novel approach that uses deep learning to automate the classification process. Our mobile and web apps employ a convolutional neural network on images either captured in real-time or mass-uploaded. Then our deep learning model, which has been pre-trained extensively on existing data, will identify the hydrophobicity grade with a disclosed level of confidence containing an accuracy and loss rating. Our CNN uses EfficientNetB0 architecture and has been trained on augmented datasets including greyscale, rotation, scaling, contrast, flipping, and Gaussian noise, as well as sequential combinations. These preprocessing techniques have improved the generalization of our model and minimized its bias in hopes of providing a more efficient, reliable, and safe solution that reduces dependency on human expertise.

Executive summary:
In power grids, polymer insulators leverage hydrophobic surfaces to operate; as a result, their effectiveness diminishes over time. This project focuses on developing a convolutional neural network that uses deep learning to classify these insulators, and then categorize them into the IEEE-defined levels of hydrophobicity ranging from 1 (high) to 6 (low). With augmented training datasets and select preprocessing techniques, the EfficientNetB0-based model will be able to provide timely, accurate assessments via web and mobile applications, lowering the barrier of entry to maintaining such insulators.
